Hello I'm professor Brian Bushee,
welcome back.
In this video we're gonna take
a look at revenue manipulations.
A revenue manipulation is where a manager
takes advantage of the discretion
in the revenue recognition criteria
to find a way to recognize more
revenue during the period which in turn
should increase the company’s earnings.
We’ll look at a number of tools and
ratios that you could use to try to detect
these kinds of revenue manipulations.
Let’s get started.
Let’s start with a brief overview of the
issues involved in revenue recognition.
So if you remember, revenue is
recognized when it's both earned,
which means the company provides goods or
services, and realizable,
which means the price is fixed and
collection of cash is probable.
But note that this does not
require that the company has
actually collected the cash.
And that means that revenue can be
recognized before cash is collected and
we're gonna call this noncash revenue.
So at the delivery of goods or services,
what the company would do is increase
revenue and increase accounts receivable
which is the money owed to
the company by the customers.
Then eventually when
the cash is collected,
the company would increase cash and
then reduce these accounts receivable.
What we're gonna look out for
is acceleration of revenue
into the current period.
Maybe what happens is the company
recognizes the revenue before it's fully
delivered the goods and services.
Or maybe what the company does,
it provides the customer right of return
if it's not resold by the customer.
Which would mean that it's
not technically realizable,
because collection of
cash is not probable.
Anyway, 50% of SEC enforcement actions
are related to revenue recognition.
So half the companies that get
busted by the SEC do so for
these revenue recognition criteria, and
that's because it's not quite this simple.
Here's what the true standard looks like,
this is SAB 101.
And this is a simplified flow chart
explaining how companies should decide
whether they can recognize revenue or not.
>> Ay caramba!
I need my other pair of
glasses to read this.
This is going to take me
a long time to memorize.
>> Don't worry,
you don't have to memorize this.
Again I just put this up there to
highlight the amount of discretion and
judgement there is in
the revenue recognition process.
Besides, you're never gonna see this
flowchart anyway outside the company, so
you wouldn't be able to evaluate it.
Instead we have to work backwards,
we have to start with
the financial statement results.
Then look at some red flags
to try to figure if we're
suspicious in how the company
implemented all of these decisions,
in this complicated revenue
recognition flow chart.
So, we're gonna use some red flags to
try to identify potential changes in
revenue recognition policies for
companies.
We're gonna look for unusual,
seasonally adjusted quarterly trends in
revenue growth,
accounts receivable growth.
We're gonna look for unusual trends
in ratios, such as days receivable,
accounts receivable to revenue,
and revenue per capacity unit.
And then we'll try to figure out what
happened if we find unusual trends.
So do earnings management incentives
exist for a company in this quarter?
And is there anything unusual in their
revenue recognition policy that we
can find?
So the first thing we're gonna
look at are revenue growth trends.
So growing firms tend to have
revenue growth in all four quarters.
Whereas earnings management
is much more likely to happen
in a specific quarter when you're
trying to meet a specific target.
One thing we have to be aware of is
that firms have some seasonality in
their revenue.
So, what seasonality means is maybe you
have a higher percentage of your sales
during a holiday season
than a non-holiday season.
So to get a good comparison we need to
look at the holiday season this year
to the same holiday season last year.
So we are going to compute something
call year over year revenue growth or
YoY revenue growth.
That’s revenue this
quarter minus revenue for
the same quarter last year divided by
revenue for the same quarter last year.
And we’ll compare this
to a couple benchmarks.
Time series, we’re going to look at
whether the growth is unusual for
one specific quarter for the firm.
And then cross-sectionally we'll
see if the growth is unusual for
the industry in a given quarter.
>> Time-Series?
Cross-sectional?
Y'all are speakin' like
a pointy-head professor again!
>> Sorry,
I do talk like an academic sometimes and
I probably will use these terms a lot.
Times series just means you're
looking at the same firm across time.
Whereas cross-sectional means you're
comparing the firm to other companies or
to the industry.
We're also going to look at
growth in accounts receivable.
If you remember noncash revenue would
be captured in changes in accounts
receivable.
So by looking at changes in accounts
receivable we get a sense for
how much of this revenue is not cash.
So we're gonna look at YoY
growth in accounts receivable,
again YoY is year over year.
As the accounts receivable at the end
of this quarter minus the the accounts
receivable by the end of
the same quarter last year
divided by that accounts receivable,
so it's seasonally adjusted.
We're gonna compare it to benchmarks.
We're gonna look at time trends for
the company.
We're gonna compare the company's
trends to the industry trends.
We're also gonna compare the growth in
accounts receivable to revenue growth
to see how much of the revenue
growth is noncash.
Not only will we compare it to growth and
revenue but
we're gonna compare it to the growth
in the amount of cash that's collected.
And cash collected can be
calculated by taking revenue
plus accounts receivable at
the beginning of the period.
So that's the total amount of cash
that could have been collected.
Minus ending accounts receivable,
which is cash that wasn't collected.
What's left over is the amount of
cash collected during the period.
We're gonna take a look at some ratios.
So we're gonna go back to our old friend,
days receivable.
Because a large increase in days
receivable could indicate a spike in
noncash revenue at the end of the quarter.
We've seen this before using annual data,
the average of accounts receivable over
the year, divided by annual revenue,
times 365.
We're gonna look at a quarterly version
where we take the average accounts
receivable over the past five quarters.
And divided by it TT revenue,
then times 365.
TT stands for trailing 12 months.
So we're gonna add up the four quarters
that end at the quarter we're looking
to approximate a year's worth of revenue
that ends at the point of
the quarter that we're looking at.
>> Although I am a genius at math,
I would rather not do more math
than absolutely necessary.
So why not just use this quarter instead
of adding up all of the prior quarters?
>> Great question, the reason that we
don't just use one quarter is seasonality.
Because of seasonality,
these quarterly ratios could jump up and
down quite a bit from quarter to quarter
just due to the seasonality in sales.
By using the year ended with that quarter,
we smooth out
the seasonality which makes it easier
to spot abnormal trends in the ratios.
We're also gonna look at the ratio of
accounts receivable to revenue, which
again could indicate a spike in noncash
revenue if we see a large increase.
This is gonna be defined as accounts
receivable divided by our trailing 12
month revenue.
And finally we're gonna look
at revenue per capacity unit.
The idea here is a large increase in
revenue per capacity unit could indicate
fraudulent revenue that's beyond the
normal capacity of the company to produce.
So we'll look at revenue per employee,
which is our trailing 12 month revenue
divided by number of employees.
Revenue per property, plant and equipment,
which is our TT Revenue
divided by gross PP&E.
Again, if these go up, it could indicate
we're producing more revenue per employee,
more revenue per piece of
equipment than we have before.
Which may be beyond our
capacity to produce and
could indicate fraudulent revenue.
>> Yada, yada, yada.
Please give us some numbers already.
>> Sure no problem,
why don't we go ahead and do a case?
Case we're gonna look at
is Pawsome Electronics.
They make consumer products for dogs,
things like microchip enabled food bowls,
electric toothbrushes, soothing sound
machines to help the dog sleep.
Electric blankets, and of course their
popular aromatherapy vaporizers.
They sell products to retail stores and
to online retailers.
They don't make any direct
sales to customers.
Pawsome was struggling during 2012-2013,
so
they hired a new CEO who
was a turnaround expert.
The new CEO made a lot of changes during
2013-2014, increased their marketing
budget, implemented a new, just in time,
automatic, retail delivery arrangement.
So when a customer was
running low on vaporizers,
Pawsome would automatically
send them more product.
They reduced their product line
to focus just on the winners, so
they got rid of a lot of
their loser products.
Which allowed them to close
18 of their 26 factories and
cut their work force from
12,000 to 7,500 employees.
Pawsome now has had an awesome
turnaround in performance in 2014.
Revenues are up 19%,
net income is $123 million,
versus a loss of $196
million in the prior year.
Stock price has risen
59% over the year and
eight security analysts now have buy or
strong buy recommendations on the stock.
There's a lot of rumors about
the company that you can find on TV,
that the company's looking to
acquire other companies and
that the CEO actually got a job
offer to come to another company.
So before we look at the numbers,
let's take a second to think are there any
earnings management incentives that
Pawsome's management might have.
Without a turnaround the CEO would lose
his reputation as a turnaround expert.
>> And it sounds like the CEO is looking
to jump ship to another company.
>> With a high stock price
it will be easier for
Pawsome to acquire another company.
>> And I bet those security analysts
would be madder than a wet armadillo
If Pawsome did not have
such high earnings.
>> Excellent job identifying
earnings management incentives.
Seems like the CEO has some
pretty strong incentives this
period to manipulate earnings.
That's the process that I want you to go
through before you look at the numbers
in the rest of these cases.
Now in the interest of time,
I'm not gonna have the virtual
students do it in the future.
Instead, I want you to try this on your
own, so before you look at the numbers,
pause the video and think about
the earnings management incentives.
So now let's go to the Pawsome spreadsheet
and take a look at some numbers.
So let's look at the data for Pawsome,
I pulled in three years
of quarterly results.
I got the revenue, net income,
accounts receivable.
Cash collected is computed from
revenue and accounts receivable,
you can see the formula there if you want.
Gross property, plant,
equipment, number of employees.
So first let's look at the year
on year change in revenue.
So 2013, it was negative,
as they were still struggling.
2014, the first two quarters of the year,
we see 10%, 13% growth.
And then we see 25 and 26% growth
in the last two quarters of 2014.
So it looks like the turnaround strategy
is really kicking in those last two
quarters.
If we look at change in receivables,
it's negative when the change
in revenue's negative.
It's roughly comparable to the change in
revenue in the first two quarters, but
in the last two quarters it gets to
be a much bigger change in accounts
receivable than in revenue, hm.
If we look at change in cash collected,
negative when revenue growth was negative.
Then it's sort of up and
down a lot during 2014, but
it's certainly much less
than the growth in revenue.
If we look at the ratio of
accounts receivable to revenue,
it was in the low 20s.
It went up a lot in
the quarter one of 2014,
back down, and then back up
again in the last two quarters.
Same pattern for days receivable,
around 81 to 82 days in 2013,
jumps up to 88, down to 84, 85, jumps back
up to 87 in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Now let's look at revenue per
property plant and equipment.
It was in the low twos, and
then it jumped up dramatically in
the last two quarters of 2014.
Same thing with revenue per employee,
a big jump in these last two quarters.
Now, it's never gonna be the case
that all of these ratios jump out and
scream, earnings management,
earnings management, earnings management.
This is fairly typical where some
of the ratios are suspicious,
other ratios are not that suspicious.
And so, I think there's a little
reason to be suspicious based
on the change in receivables
versus the change in revenue.
And the revenue capacity per capacity
unit, but not every ratio is
screaming earnings management,
which is fairly typical unfortunately.
>> Is it not within
the realm of possibility
that the growth in sales was due to
a splendiferous holiday sales season?
>> Yes it is within
the realm of possibility and
that's why we need to benchmark
these trends with some competitors.
So if we see the same trends in
the competitors then it's probably not
earnings management but
just something going on in the industry.
So I'll bring up a couple competitors and
we'll do this analysis now.
But just as a heads up I'm not
gonna do this every video.
In the interest of time you
can assume in the future,
that the things that we're looking at for
the firm are abnormal.
But I figure we may as well take the time
to go through a competitor analysis at
least once.
So I brought in data for two of Possum's
competitors, Fidotronics and Chienco.
Instead of fighting through all
the numbers, I've put them into graphs so
that we can easily compare.
So Pawsome is in orange, this is
the year on year change in revenue.
You see the big increase in 2014 that
was not shared by their competitors.
If we look at the year on year
change in accounts receivable we see
the big spike for Pawsome.
Again, not reflected in their competitors,
so
we know that the accounts receivable
increase was not due to industry or
economy effects, but
it was unique to Pawsome.
Change in cash collected,
not much of a trend.
Accounts receivable to revenue,
days receivable,
yeah, it's hard to see
much of a trend going on.
Sales to PP&E we can see for Pawsome,
it's hard to see with the scale,
but Pawsome, we see it going up whereas
the two competitors it's flat or down.
And sales to employees, it's going up for
all of these companies, but
there's a continued big increase for
Pawsome at the point where their
competitors seem to
level out a little bit.
So again, not conclusive, but
it does suggest that Pawsome was
unique in terms of its growth in
revenue versus its growth in AR and in
these revenue per capacity unit measures.
>> You have piqued my curiosity.
Please tells us what happened.
>> Okay here's what happened.
So it turned out Pawsome CEO engaged
in a channel stuffing scheme
in the last two quarters of 2014.
Remember that change in policy
to going to the just in time
inventory delivery system?
Well, the CEO manipulated that system to
deliver extra goods to retailers just
before the quarter end, increase revenue,
but of course it's all noncash.
The retailers then returned all
the excess inventory to Pawsome, but
the returns happened in the next quarter.
So that allowed Pawsome to get
the benefit of the sales and
make their earnings target this quarter
and then they took the hit next quarter.
But what it did was it kept their stock
price high because they were meeting their
earnings target which allowed them
to acquire two other companies
which doubled the size of the company.
However, some analysts started to raise
some concerns about the high growth in
accounts receivable.
The auditor saw that and the auditor saw
all the returns that were coming back and
started to question the revenue
recognition practices.
And eventually Pawsome, because of these
criticisms, had to restate their prior
results to remove all their questionable
revenue and all this stuff became public.
Pawsome's reputation took a big
hit with customers and investors,
they ended up filing for bankruptcy
within three years of this scheme and
eventually were acquired
by DogWorld Industries.
So this was a situation where Pawsome had
clear earnings management incentives,
they were trying to do acquisitions,
the CEO was looking to get out of
the company before things went bad.
We saw the change in the revenue
recognition policy, and
then a lot of these ratios indicated that
there was a lot of noncash revenue, and
maybe the revenue was too big for
their capacity, and so
there were a lot of suspicions here.
Again, putting those together
doesn't conclusively mean that it's
always gonna be a fraud, but
when you see those things line up,
the incentives,
the change in policy, the ratios.
Then it becomes much more likely that
you're looking at something where there's
been earnings management.
That was an awesome example
of this kind of analysis.
So the tools that we looked at are gonna
be really good at trying to spot
aggressive revenue recognition that
happens before cash is received.
But sometimes the aggressive
revenue recognition happens
after the cash is received.
And that's what we're gonna take
a look at in the next video.
I'll see you then.
>> See you next video.